Title:  Predicting Human Activity Using Samsung Dataset
Introduction:
Smartphones are equipped with various sensor technologies, two of which are the accelerometer and gyroscope.  “The accelerometer detects the 3-dimensional (3D) spatial orientation of the device and measures its acceleration relative to freefall in three different axes: X, Y, and Z. A gyroscope measures or maintains orientation, based on the principles of angular momentum. Combining a gyroscope with an accelerometer allows the [smartphones] to sense motion on six axes – left, right, up, down, forward and backward, as well as roll, pitch and yaw rotations – allowing for more accurate motion-sensing abilities [1].  

Data Source:

The data used in this data cleaning exercise is a subset of the “Human Activity Recognitions Using Smartphones Dataset” collected by Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory, 
University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy. The data were from 30 participants with ages ranging from 19 to 48 years old. Six human activities, namely: walking, walking upstairs or downstairs, sitting, standing and laying down were recorded by Samsung Galaxy S II smartphones worn on the waist by each participants.. A detailed description of the experiment and the data set is available at the UCI Machine Learning Repository [2].  This dataset was downloaded from the course website: 
https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip  on July 22, 2014. The dataset files used in this exercise consists of:

1.	features.txt - list of all features
2.	activity_labels.txt - list of class labels with their activity name
3.	train/X_train.txt - Training set
4.	train/y_train.txt - Training labels
5.	test/X_test.txt - Test set
6.	test/y_test.txt - Test labels.
7.	train/subject_train.txt - Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for each window sample. Its range is from 1 to 30. 

The raw datasets had a total of 10,299 observation records, each having 561-feature vectors with time and frequency domain variables.  The 561 variables were data from the accelerometer and gyroscope readings. The train and test datasets contributed 7,352 (70%) and 2947 (30%) observations, respectively.  In addition, respective data for the activity label and subject/participants were also provided.  

The 3D acceleration signals from the accelerometer were divided into the body and gravity acceleration and denoted as tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ (the prefix t is for time in seconds).  Measurements from the gyroscope 3-axial signals were designated as tGyro-XYZ. The jerk (Jerk) signals from the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were designated as tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ.  Some of the variables that were converted using Fast Fourier Transformation have prefix “f” for frequency with a low cutoff of 0.3 Hz.  Magnitudes of the three-dimensional signals were labeled with a suffix “Mag.”  Additional variable notations/differentiations include (but are not limited to) [2]:
mean(): Mean value
std(): Standard deviation
max(): Largest value in array
min(): Smallest value in array
energy(): Energy measure. Sum of the squares divided by the number of values. 
bandsEnergy(): Energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window.
angle(): Angle between two vectors.

Additional vectors were obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable: gravityMean, tBodyAccMean, tBodyAccJerkMean, tBodyGyroMean and tBodyGyroJerkMean [2] .

Study Design:

The data were combined to create the train and test set by merging the activity, subject and train or test sets.  Then the train and test data sets were merged and created the 10,299X564 “big data.” The data that were designated as means and standard deviations were extracted from the “big data.” Lastly, averages were computed.

Code Book:

These are the variables that satisfy the condition that only “measurements that were means or standard deviations” for each observations:
